partition: add doc for global index, also with GLOBAL IndexOption/ColumnOption (#18543)
pingcap/docs: partitioned-table.md

### Partitioning keys, primary keys and unique keys

This section discusses the relationship of partitioning keys with primary keys and unique keys. The rule governing this relationship can be expressed as follows: **Every unique key on the table must use every column in the table's partitioning expression**. This also includes the table's primary key, because it is by definition a unique key. 

> **Note:**
> 

> > This rule only applies to the scenarios where [`tidb_enable_global_index`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_global_index-new-in-v760) is not enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This rule only applies to the scenarios where the [`tidb_enable_global_index`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_global_index-new-in-v760) system variable is not enabled. When it is enabled, unique keys in partitioned tables are not required to include all the columns used in the partition expressions. For more information, see [global indexes](#global-indexes).
```

+--------------+------------+------------+----------+--------------+-------------+----------+---------------+------------+----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| test         | t1         |          0 | uidx12   |            1 | col1        |     NULL |               | NULL       |        1 | YES        | NO        |         1 |
| test         | t1         |          0 | uidx12   |            2 | col2        |     NULL |               | NULL       |        1 | YES        | NO        |         1 |
| test         | t1         |          0 | uidx3    |            1 | col3        |     NULL |               | NULL       |        2 | YES        | NO        |         0 |
+--------------+------------+------------+----------+--------------+-------------+----------+---------------+------------+----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

When partitioning a non-partitioned table or re-partitioning an already partitioned table it is possible to update the indexes to be [global index](#global-indexes) or default local indexes.

```sql
ALTER TABLE t1 PARTITION BY HASH (col1) PARTITIONS 3 UPDATE INDEXES (uidx12 LOCAL, uidx3 GLOBAL);
```

> ##### Limitations of global indexes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

##### Limitations of global indexes
```

ERROR 1503 (HY000): A UNIQUE INDEX must include all columns in the table's partitioning function
```

> 

Reviewer: It seems that L1456 also needs updates so users can know that the mentioned rules (limitations) in that line only apply to the scenarios where `tidb_enable_global_index` is not enabled.

Reviewer 2: Added a note here https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/18543/files#diff-20864a53c3332130114abe4d0bd81371983d49d5ad8cc6f11efd17e06ddc5302R1458

#### Global indexes

Before the introduction of global indexes, TiDB created a local index for each partition. Therefore, there was [a limitation](#partitioning-keys-primary-keys-and-unique-keys) that primary keys and unique keys had to include the partition key to ensure uniqueness of the data. Additionally, when querying data that spans multiple partitions, the system needed to scan the data of each partition to return results.

To address these issues, TiDB introduces the global indexes feature in v8.3.0. Global indexes cover the data of the entire table with a single index, allowing primary keys and unique keys to maintain global uniqueness without including the partition key. At the same time, global indexes can access data spanning multiple partitions in a single operation, significantly improving query performance for non-partitioned keys.

> 

Reviewer: Do we need to add the experimental feature warning here?

Reviewer 2: Done https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/18543/files#r1718353327

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

> **Warning:**
>
> The feature controlled by this variable is experimental. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue]([https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues?q=sort%3Aupdated-desc+is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen)) on GitHub.

```

Note that global indexes affect partition management. `DROP`, `TRUNCATE`, and `REORGANIZE PARTITION` also require managing table-level global indexes, meaning that these DDL operations will only return results after the global indexes have been fully updated.

```sql
SET tidb_enable_global_index = ON;

CREATE TABLE t1 (
    col1 INT NOT NULL,
    col2 DATE NOT NULL,
    col3 INT NOT NULL,
    col4 INT NOT NULL,
    UNIQUE KEY uidx12(col1, col2) GLOBAL,
    UNIQUE KEY uidx3(col3)
)
PARTITION BY HASH(col3)
PARTITIONS 4;
```

In this example, the unique index `uidx12` will be a global index, but `uidx3` remains a regular unique index.

Note that a **clustered index** cannot be a global index, as shown in the following example:

```sql
SET tidb_enable_global_index = ON;

CREATE TABLE t2 (
    col1 INT NOT NULL,
    col2 DATE NOT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY (col2) CLUSTERED GLOBAL
) PARTITION BY HASH(col1) PARTITIONS 5;
```

```
ERROR 1503 (HY000): A CLUSTERED INDEX must include all columns in the table's partitioning function
```

> The reason is that if the clustered index is a global index, the table will no longer be partitioned. This is because the key of the clustered index is also the record key, which means it should be on partition level. But the global index is on table level, which causes a conflict. If you need to set the primary key as a global index, you must explicitly define it as a non-clustered index, for example, `PRIMARY KEY(col1, col2) NONCLUSTERED GLOBAL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason is that if the clustered index is a global index, the table will no longer be partitioned. This is because the key of the clustered index is also the record key at the partition level, but the global index is at the table level, which causes a conflict. If you need to set the primary key as a global index, you must explicitly define it as a non-clustered index, for example, `PRIMARY KEY(col1, col2) NONCLUSTERED GLOBAL`.
```

> You can identify a global index by the GLOBAL IndexOption in the [`SHOW CREATE TABLE`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-create-table.md) output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can identify a global index by the `GLOBAL` index option in the [`SHOW CREATE TABLE`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-show-create-table.md) output.
```

```sql
SHOW CREATE TABLE t1\G
```

```
       Table: t1
Create Table: CREATE TABLE `t1` (
  `col1` int(11) NOT NULL,
  `col2` date NOT NULL,
  `col3` int(11) NOT NULL,
  `col4` int(11) NOT NULL,
  UNIQUE KEY `uidx12` (`col1`,`col2`) /*T![global_index] GLOBAL */,
  UNIQUE KEY `uidx3` (`col3`)
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin
PARTITION BY HASH (`col3`) PARTITIONS 4
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
```

> Or querying the [`information_schema.tidb_indexes`](/information-schema/information-schema-tidb-indexes.md) table and checking the table structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can query the [`INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIDB_INDEXES`](/information-schema/information-schema-tidb-indexes.md) table and check the `IS_GLOBAL` column in the output.
```

```sql

> SELECT * FROM information_schema.tidb_indexes WHERE table_name='t1';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM INFORMATION_SCHEMA.TIDB_INDEXES WHERE table_name='t1';
```

| TABLE_SCHEMA | TABLE_NAME | NON_UNIQUE | KEY_NAME | SEQ_IN_INDEX | COLUMN_NAME | SUB_PART | INDEX_COMMENT | Expression | INDEX_ID | IS_VISIBLE | CLUSTERED | IS_GLOBAL |
+--------------+------------+------------+----------+--------------+-------------+----------+---------------+------------+----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| test         | t1         |          0 | uidx12   |            1 | col1        |     NULL |               | NULL       |        1 | YES        | NO        |         1 |
| test         | t1         |          0 | uidx12   |            2 | col2        |     NULL |               | NULL       |        1 | YES        | NO        |         1 |
| test         | t1         |          0 | uidx3    |            1 | col3        |     NULL |               | NULL       |        2 | YES        | NO        |         0 |
+--------------+------------+------------+----------+--------------+-------------+----------+---------------+------------+----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

> When partitioning a non-partitioned table or re-partitioning an already partitioned table it is possible to update the indexes to be [global index](#global-indexes) or default local indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When partitioning a non-partitioned table or repartitioning an already partitioned table, you can update the indexes to be global indexes or revert them to local indexes as needed:
```

```sql
ALTER TABLE t1 PARTITION BY HASH (col1) PARTITIONS 3 UPDATE INDEXES (uidx12 LOCAL, uidx3 GLOBAL);
```

##### Limitations of global indexes

> - If the `GLOBAL` keyword is not explicitly specified, a local index will be created by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the `GLOBAL` keyword is not explicitly specified in the index definition, TiDB creates a local index by default.
```

> - The `GLOBAL` and `LOCAL` keywords only apply to partitioned tables and have no effect on non-partitioned tables. In other words, there is no difference between a global index and a local index in non-partitioned tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `GLOBAL` and `LOCAL` keywords only apply to partitioned tables and do not affect non-partitioned tables. In other words, there is no difference between a global index and a local index in non-partitioned tables.
```

> - DDL operations such as `ADD PARTITION`, `DROP PARTITION`, `TRUNCATE PARTITION`, `REORGANIZE PARTITION`, `SPLIT PARTITION`, and `EXCHANGE PARTITION` will trigger updates to global indexes. The results of these DDL operations will only be returned after the global index updates are complete. This impacts scenarios that require quick DDL completion, for example, data archiving operations such as `EXCHANGE PARTITION`, `TRUNCATE PARTITION`, and `DROP PARTITION`. In contrast, when global indexes are not involved, these DDL operations can be completed immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- DDL operations such as `ADD PARTITION`, `DROP PARTITION`, `TRUNCATE PARTITION`, `REORGANIZE PARTITION`, `SPLIT PARTITION`, and `EXCHANGE PARTITION` also trigger updates to global indexes. The results of these DDL operations will only be returned after the global indexes of the corresponding tables are fully updated. This can delay operations that usually require quick DDL completion, such as data archiving operations (`EXCHANGE PARTITION`, `TRUNCATE PARTITION`, and `DROP PARTITION`). In contrast, when global indexes are not involved, these DDL operations can be completed immediately.
```

ERROR 1503 (HY000): A UNIQUE INDEX must include all columns in the table's partitioning function
```

#### Global indexes

> Before the introduction of global indexes, TiDB created a local index for each partition. Therefore, primary keys and unique keys had to include the partition key to ensure uniqueness of the data. Additionally, when querying data that spans multiple partitions, the system needed to scan the data of each partition to return results.
> 
> To address these issues, TiDB introduces the global indexes feature in v8.3.0. Global indexes cover the data of the entire table with a single index, allowing primary keys and unique keys to maintain global uniqueness without including the partition key. At the same time, global indexes can access data spanning multiple partitions in a single operation, significantly improving query performance for non-partitioned keys.
> 
> Previously an index on partitioned tables are created for each partition, which is the reason for [the limitation](#partitioning-keys-primary-keys-and-unique-keys) that every unique key on the table must use every column in the table's partitioning expression. The uniqueness can only be enforced within each partition. A global index will be created on table level, so it can enforce uniqueness regardless of partitioning. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before the introduction of global indexes, TiDB created a local index for each partition. Therefore, there was [a limitation](#partitioning-keys-primary-keys-and-unique-keys) that primary keys and unique keys had to include the partition key to ensure uniqueness of the data. Additionally, when querying data that spans multiple partitions, the system needed to scan the data of each partition to return results.

To address these issues, TiDB introduces the global indexes feature in v8.3.0. Global indexes cover the data of the entire table with a single index, allowing primary keys and unique keys to maintain global uniqueness without including the partition key. At the same time, global indexes can access data spanning multiple partitions in a single operation, significantly improving query performance for non-partitioned keys.
```

ERROR 1503 (HY000): A UNIQUE INDEX must include all columns in the table's partitioning function
```

#### Global indexes

If you need to create unique indexes that **do not include all the columns used in the partition expressions**, you can achieve this by enabling the [`tidb_enable_global_index`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_global_index-new-in-v760) system variable.

> Previously an index on partitioned tables are created for each partition, which is the reason for the limitation that all unique keys need to include all partitioning columns. The uniqueness can only be enforced within each partition. A global index will be created on table level, so it can enforce uniqueness regardless of partitioning. Note that this has implications on partitioning management, `DROP`, `TRUNCATE`, and `REORGANIZE PARTITION` will also need to manage the table level global index.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously an index on partitioned tables are created for each partition, which is the reason for the limitation that all unique keys need to include all partition keys. The uniqueness can only be enforced within each partition. A global index will be created on table level, so it can enforce uniqueness regardless of partitioning. Note that this has implications on partitioning management, `DROP`, `TRUNCATE`, and `REORGANIZE PARTITION` will also need to manage the table level global index.
```

ERROR 1503 (HY000): A UNIQUE INDEX must include all columns in the table's partitioning function
```

#### Global indexes

> 

Reviewer 3: ### Global indexes
Before the introduction of Global Indexes, TiDB created a Local Index for each partition, meaning one Local Index per partition. Therefore, Primary Keys and Unique Keys had to include the partition key to ensure uniqueness of the data. Additionally, when querying data that spans multiple partitions, the system needed to scan each partition’s data to return results.

To address these issues, TiDB introduced Global Indexes starting from version 8.3. Global Indexes cover the entire table's data with a single index, allowing Primary Keys and Unique Keys to maintain global uniqueness without including the partition key. At the same time, Global Indexes can access data spanning multiple partitions in a single operation, significantly improving query performance for non-partitioned keys.

> If you need to create unique indexes that **do not include all the columns used in the partition expressions**, you can achieve this by enabling the [`tidb_enable_global_index`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_global_index-new-in-v760) system variable.
> 
> Previously an index on partitioned tables are created for each partition, which is the reason for [the limitation](#partitioning-keys-primary-keys-and-unique-keys) that every unique key on the table must use every column in the table's partitioning expression. The uniqueness can only be enforced within each partition. A global index will be created on table level, so it can enforce uniqueness regardless of partitioning. Note that this has implications on partitioning management, `DROP`, `TRUNCATE`, and `REORGANIZE PARTITION` will also need to manage the table level global index.
> 
> After enabling this variable, any unique index that does not meet the preceding constraint will need the `GLOBAL` attribute and will then become a global index.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Previously an index on partitioned tables are created for each partition, which is the reason for [the limitation](#partitioning-keys-primary-keys-and-unique-keys) that every unique key on the table must use every column in the table's partitioning expression. The uniqueness can only be enforced within each partition. A global index will be created on table level, so it can enforce uniqueness regardless of partitioning. Note that this has implications on partitioning management, `DROP`, `TRUNCATE`, and `REORGANIZE PARTITION` will also need to manage the table level global index.

If you need to create unique indexes that **do not include all the columns used in the partition expressions**, you can achieve this by enabling the [`tidb_enable_global_index`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_global_index-new-in-v760) system variable.

After enabling this variable, any unique index that does not meet the preceding constraint will need the `GLOBAL` attribute and will then become a global index.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that Global Indexes affect partition management. DROP, TRUNCATE, and REORGANIZE PARTITION also require managing table-level global indexes, meaning that these DDL operations will only return results after the global indexes have been fully updated.
```

```sql
SET tidb_enable_global_index = ON;

CREATE TABLE t1 (
    col1 INT NOT NULL,
    col2 DATE NOT NULL,
    col3 INT NOT NULL,
    col4 INT NOT NULL,
    UNIQUE KEY uidx12(col1, col2) GLOBAL,
    UNIQUE KEY uidx3(col3)
)
PARTITION BY HASH(col3)
PARTITIONS 4;
```

In this example, the unique index `uidx12` will be a global index, but `uidx3` remains a regular unique index.

Note that a **clustered index** cannot be a global index, as shown in the following example:

```sql
SET tidb_enable_global_index = ON;

CREATE TABLE t2 (
    col1 INT NOT NULL,
    col2 DATE NOT NULL,
    PRIMARY KEY (col2) CLUSTERED GLOBAL
) PARTITION BY HASH(col1) PARTITIONS 5;
```

```
ERROR 1503 (HY000): A CLUSTERED INDEX must include all columns in the table's partitioning function
```

> The reason is that if the clustered index is a global index, the table will no longer be partitioned. This is because the key of the clustered index is also the record key, which means it should be on partition level. But the global index is on table level, which causes a conflict.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The reason is that if the clustered index is a global index, the table will no longer be partitioned. This is because the key of the clustered index is also the record key, which means it should be on partition level. But the global index is on table level, which causes a conflict. If you need to set the primary key as a Global Index, you must explicitly define it as a non-clustered index, such as PRIMARY KEY(col1, col2) NONCLUSTERED GLOBAL.
```

+--------------+------------+------------+----------+--------------+-------------+----------+---------------+------------+----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| test         | t1         |          0 | uidx12   |            1 | col1        |     NULL |               | NULL       |        1 | YES        | NO        |         1 |
| test         | t1         |          0 | uidx12   |            2 | col2        |     NULL |               | NULL       |        1 | YES        | NO        |         1 |
| test         | t1         |          0 | uidx3    |            1 | col3        |     NULL |               | NULL       |        2 | YES        | NO        |         0 |
+--------------+------------+------------+----------+--------------+-------------+----------+---------------+------------+----------+------------+-----------+-----------+
3 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

When partitioning a non-partitioned table or re-partitioning an already partitioned table it is possible to update the indexes to be [global index](#global-indexes) or default local indexes.

```sql
ALTER TABLE t1 PARTITION BY HASH (col1) PARTITIONS 3 UPDATE INDEXES (uidx12 LOCAL, uidx3 GLOBAL);
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Limitations of Global Indexes

- If the GLOBAL keyword is not explicitly specified, a local index will be created by default.
- The GLOBAL and LOCAL keywords only apply to partitioned tables and have no effect on non-partitioned tables. In other words, there is no difference between a global index and a local index in non-partitioned tables.
- DDL operations such as ADD PARTITION, DROP PARTITION, TRUNCATE PARTITION, REORGANIZE PARTITION, SPLIT PARTITION, and EXCHANGE PARTITION will trigger updates to global indexes. The results of these DDL operations will only be returned after the global index updates are complete. This impacts scenarios that require quick DDL completion, such as data archiving operations like EXCHANGE PARTITION, TRUNCATE PARTITION, and DROP PARTITION. In contrast, when Global Indexes are not involved, these DDL operations can be completed immediately.
- By default, the primary key (PK) of a partitioned table is a clustered index and must include the partition key. If you require the primary key to exclude the partition key, you can explicitly specify the primary key as a non-clustered global index when creating the table, for example: PRIMARY KEY(col1, col2) NONCLUSTERED GLOBAL.

```

ERROR 1503 (HY000): A UNIQUE INDEX must include all columns in the table's partitioning function
```

#### Global indexes

Before the introduction of global indexes, TiDB created a local index for each partition, leading to [a limitation](#partitioning-keys-primary-keys-and-unique-keys) that primary keys and unique keys had to include the partition key to ensure data uniqueness. Additionally, when querying data across multiple partitions, TiDB needed to scan the data of each partition to return results.

> To address these issues, TiDB introduces the global indexes feature in v8.3.0. A global index covers the data of the entire table with a single index, allowing primary keys and unique keys to maintain global uniqueness without including the partition key. Moreover, global indexes can access data across multiple partitions in a single operation, significantly improving query performance for non-partitioned keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address these issues, TiDB introduces the global indexes feature in v8.3.0. A global index covers the data of the entire table with a single index, allowing primary keys and unique keys to maintain global uniqueness without including all partition keys. Moreover, global indexes can access data across multiple partitions in a single operation, significantly improving query performance for non-partitioned keys.
```

> **Warning:**
>

> > The feature controlled by this variable is experimental. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue]([https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues?q=sort%3Aupdated-desc+is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen)) on GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The feature controlled by this variable is experimental. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues) on GitHub.
```
